# 20.440: Analysis of Biological Networks, Problem Set 5

## Overview
This repository contains data and code required to generate a bar chart showing the frequency of mutations in a given chromosome (chr 11) for two patients with acute myeloid leukemia. In other words, the y axis shows the number of mutations in chr11 divided by the patient's total number of mutations. The data and analysis contained in this repository is a simple demonstration of our ability to analyze mutation data from the National Cancer Institute. The repo contains patient data, code used to create the figure, and an example figure for reference.

## Data
There are two data files associated with each patient - clinical data and mutation data. All data was obtained from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) GDC data portal. The raw clinical data contains information related to the patient's medical history and clinical course and is stored in files containing the patient identifier followed by the word "clinical" (ex. p2clinical.tsv). This file information such as the patient's age, gender, race, diagnosis, age at diagnosis, etc. It also contains information about the project through which the data was collected. The raw mutation data was obtained through a variety of methods, which vary according to the patient. In the entire data set that was examined (cancers of hematopoietic and reticuloendothelial systems), sequencing approaches included targeted sequencing, whole exome sequencing, RNA-seq, miRNA-seq, WGS, genotyping arrays, and methylation arrays. A summary of the sequencing approaches and the associated raw data for each patient is available on the website, in addition to a table detailing the cumulative findings. The latter has been used in this analysis and is stored in files containing the patient identifier followed by the term "frequent-mutations" (ex. p2frequent-mutations). This information includes the chromosome, mutation site, nucleotide change, the nature of the mutation (substitution, deletion, etc.), the consequence (missense, frameshift, etc.), implicated gene, amino acid change, and VEP, SIFT, and PolyPhen impacts, if available.

GDC portal: https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/
To examine data, navigate to the exploration tab. Clinical information can be found by clicking on the Case ID and navigating to the clinical tab. When downloaded, three files appear in a zip folder. The data used in this repo is titled "clinical." On the explore page, mutation data can be found by scrolling to the right and clicking on the number of mutations displayed for a given Case ID. This data can then be downloaded as a .tsv.

## Folder Structure
The folder 'patient-data' contains the clinical data file and mutation summary data file for each patient (p2 and p3), for a total of two files per patient and four files in the folder. The folder 'Code and Instructions' contains this README.md and a code file (.py). The provided script reads the data in the patient-data folder, uses the mutation data to calculate the frequency of mutations in each chromosome, and creates a data frame of information with one row per patient. This data frame contains all the clinical and mutation data from the files in addition to the calculated frequency data. The script then plots a figure showing the frequency of mutations in chromosome 11 for each patient. The folder 'Figure' contains a .png file that shows the output of the script for reference.

## Installation
The script (hw5codegit.py) was written in Python 3.6.5. It uses the software packages os, pandas, and seaborn. Because os is a standard library, it does not need to be installed. Seaborn is a library that is part of matplotlib. Because pandas and matplotlib are both part of SciPy, it is recommended to install Anaconda for automatic access to all SciPy software packages. This code was written with SciPy version 1.1.0. If you are using the terminal, you can install these packages (or Anaconda) using pip. The script contains all steps necessary to import the required software packages, execute the code, and produce the figure. If you would like, you can insert a line of code to save the figure to a desired location in a desired format.
