Overview
This repository contains data and code required to generate a bar chart showing the frequency of mutations in a given chromosome (chr 11) between two patients with acute myeloid leukemia. In other words, the y axis shows the number of mutations in chr11 divided by the patient's total number of mutations. The data and analysis contained in this repository is a simple demonstration of our ability to analyze mutation data from the National Cancer Institute. The repo contains patient data, code used to create the figure, and an example figure for reference.

Data
There are two data files associated with each patient - clinical data and mutation data. All data was obtained from the National Cancer Institute (NCI) GDC data portal. The raw clinical data contains information related to the patient's medical history and clinical course. This includes information such as the patient's age, gender, race, diagnosis, age at diagnosis, etc. This file also contains information about the project through which the data was collected. The raw mutation data was obtained through a variety of methods, which vary according to the patient. In the entire data set that was examined (cancers of hematopoietic and reticuloendothelial systems), sequencing approaches included targeted sequencing, whole exome sequencing, RNA-seq, miRNA-seq, WGS, genotyping arrays, and methylation arrays. These files are available for download, however, the data used here contains a summary of all mutations identified using these methods. This information includes the chromosome, mutation site, and nucleotide change, the nature of the mutation (substitution, deletion, etc.), the consequence (missense, frameshift, etc.), implicated gene, amino acid change, and VEP, SIFT, and PolyPhen impacts, if available.

Folder Structure
The folder patient-data contains the clinical data and mutation summary data for each patient (p2 and p3), for a total of two files per patient and four files in the folder. The folder Code and Instructions contains this README.md and a Jupyter notebook file to read the data in the patient-data folder, create a data frame of information with one row per patient, plot a figure showing the frequency of mutations in chromosome 11 for each patient, and save the figure.

Installation
